📝 Alpha-lab article about using GPT4-V with Neon/PI (#649)
pupil-labs/pupil-docs: alpha-lab/gpt4-eyes/index.md

:::

## Combining Eye Tracking With AI for Assistive Applications

Unlike popular Large *Language* Models (LLMs), which can only interpret and interact with text, Large *Multimodal* Models (LMMs) are also able to understand images. This means chatbots, like GPT, can understand, describe and interpret the content of real-world scenes, including identifying different objects and how people might interact with them.

When combined with eye tracking, this holds potential for assistive technologies. For example, it could help individuals with low vision to identify the objects at which they are gazing, highlight potential hazards in their surroundings, or assist people with ALS who face significant communication challenges.

Here, we show you how to build a simple, explorative, gaze-based assistive tool using Neon or Pupil Invisible and a new LMM, GPT-4V.

## What Tools Enable This

OpenAI recently unveiled a set of new APIs at their [DevDay event,](https://openai.com/blog/new-models-and-developer-products-announced-at-devday) introducing GPT-4V, an extension of their most advanced large language model capable of [understanding images](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/vision). 

> We got access to the preview and decided to see what is capable of when integrated with our eye trackers. We used Neon and Pupil Invisible because they remove the barrier of calibration, making them more suitable for real-life applications, longer recording sessions, and thus use alongside GPT-4V for experimenting with assistive applications.

Reviewer: Was PI used here?

Reviewer: > and thus use alongside GPT-4V for experimenting with assistive applications.

Can you improve this sentence especially the last part quoted above?

Author: > Was PI used here?

No, but it would work with the same code, out of the box.

> Can you improve this sentence, especially the last part quoted above?
What about?

We gained access to the preview and decided to see what their model is capable of when integrated with our eye trackers. We used Neon and Pupil Invisible since they remove the barrier of calibration, making them more suitable for longer sessions and real-life scenarios and, therefore, in a better position to experiment with assistive applications.

Reviewer 2: We gained access to the preview and decided to see what their model is capable of when integrated with our eye trackers. We used Neon and Pupil Invisible since they remove the barrier of calibration, making them more suitable for longer sessions and real-life scenarios and, therefore, in a good position to experiment with assistive applications

> We used our [real-time API](https://docs.pupil-labs.com/neon/real-time-api/introduction/) as it enables streaming of scene camera and gaze positions over the network in real-time. This meant we could grab a frame at a selected moment and send it to GPT4-V for further processing, informing the wearer about what they were seeing or whatever we wanted to ask it about the scene.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We used the [real-time API](https://docs.pupil-labs.com/neon/real-time-api/introduction/) to stream scene camera video and gaze positions over the network. We grab a frame from the real-time stream and send it to GPT4-V for processing. We get back text that can be used to inform the wearer about what they were looking at or whatever we wanted to ask about the scene.
```

## Steps

> To try this demo, you'll need a Neon or Pupil Invisible device, a computer/laptop with internet access, and an OpenAI key that has access to the latest GPT-4V model. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To try this demo, you'll need a Neon or Pupil Invisible eye tracker, a computer with internet access, and an OpenAI key that has access to the latest GPT-4V model. 
```

::: tip
[Don’t have access to `gpt-4-vision-preview model`?](https://help.openai.com/en/articles/7102672-how-can-i-access-gpt-4) You may have to spend 1$ on their APIs to get access to this model.
:::

Head to this [script](https://gist.github.com/mikelgg93/46a02823e1e271087c3eb6b2ab2cb99d) and follow the installation instructions.

## Scene Understanding in Real-Time

> After running the example and pressing the `Space` key when you’re gazing at something, a snapshot of what you’re looking at will be sent to GPT-4V, and you will receive a vocal response. The nature of the AI assistant's response will depend on the selected model **("ASDF")**. This could be `A`, a description of what you're gazing at; `S`, any potential danger; `D`, a guess of your intentions; or `F`, a more detailed description of the environment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Look at something in your environment and press the `Space` key. A snapshot with gaze overlay will be sent to GPT-4V, and you will receive a vocal response. 

The nature of the AI assistant's response will depend on the selected model. We have defined 4 modes that can be toggled with **("ASDF")** keys:
1. `A`: a description of what you're gazing at.
2. `S`: any potential danger. 
3. `D`: a guess about your intentions.
4. `F`: a more detailed description of the environment. 
```

Reviewer: I think we could probably reduce the first paragraph a bit because we already talk about the architecture of the system a bit (e.g. how it works). 

Should we link to the prompts for each of the modes?

Author: It was decided to be left as an implementation detail in the gist

> In this early exploration, we found that GPT-4V is generally good at detecting what is being gazed at or trying to guess the intention of the wearer. But not fast or accurate enough to detect immediate dangers. There was some network latency, but generally, it worked quite well. You can modify the prompt in the code to tailor it to your specific needs. We ultimately can’t say just how useful this will be for assistive users. For that, we need your feedback!

Reviewer: Perhaps we could allude to the fact that the field is moving very quicikly, and how it could be improved for latency (e.g. have a local model running),

Author: > Perhaps we could allude to the fact that the field is moving very quickly, and how it could be improved for latency (e.g. have a local model running),

Here is a suggestion that tries to blend this in, links for SEO and keeps somehow the simplicity

In this early exploration, we found that GPT-4V is generally good at detecting what is being gazed at or trying to guess the wearer's intention but not fast or accurate enough to detect immediate dangers. There was some network latency, but generally, it worked quite well, and you can modify the prompt in the code to tailor it to your specific needs. While we ultimately can’t say just how useful this will be for assistive users, the rapid advancements in the field suggest that we might soon see these types of models running [locally](https://android-developers.googleblog.com/2023/12/a-new-foundation-for-ai-on-android.html) and with almost no latency. How useful can this be? It is for you to determine, but we would love to hear your feedback!

Reviewer 2: In this initial exploration, GPT-4V was generally good at identifying what was being gazed at or trying to predict the wearer's intentions. However, it wasn't fast enough to detect immediate dangers due to network latency. The great thing about GPT-4V is that you can modify the prompts to suit your specific needs. Rapid advancements in the field suggest that we might soon see these types of models operating [locally](https://android-developers.googleblog.com/2023/12/a-new-foundation-for-ai-on-android.html) and with virtually no latency. How useful could this be? We would love to hear your feedback!
